[docs][insights] add docs explaining how to use insights w/ asset metadata (#19552)
dagster-io/dagster: docs/content/dagster-cloud/insights/asset-metadata.mdx

---
title: "Using asset metadata with Dagster Cloud Insights | Dagster Docs"
description: "Integrating external metrics with Dagster Insights."

platform_type: "cloud"
---

# Using asset metadata with Dagster Cloud Insights (Experimental)

<Note>
  This feature is considered <strong>experimental</strong>.
</Note>

Any numeric [asset materialization metadata](/concepts/assets/software-defined-assets#recording-materialization-metadata) attached to your assets can be viewed and aggregated in the Dagster Insights UI. This is a good way to track usage, cost, data size, or other characteristics of your data assets over time, and across different parts of your platform.

---

## Prerequisites

To complete the steps in this guide, you'll need:

> - A Dagster Cloud account on the Enterprise plan

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A Dagster Cloud account on the Pro plan
```

> - Access to the [Dagster Cloud Insights feature](/dagster-cloud/insights)

Reviewer: It looks like you removed the **Getting Access** section from the main Insights page - is this feature now available by default? If so, I think we can take this out

Author: Yes, it is!

---

## Step 1: Emit numeric values alongside your asset materializations

> In order to populate Insights with materialization metadata, you must first emit numeric metadata to be aggregated.

Reviewer: Could you add a sentence or two about what's taking place in the example? I know it seems like overkill, but it's been proven to be helpful.

Author: Yes!

```python file=/concepts/assets/asset_materialization_metadata_none.py
from dagster import Output, asset

@asset
def table1() -> Output[None]:
    ...  # write out some data to table1
    return Output(None, metadata={"num_rows": 25})
```

For more examples, see the [asset materialization metadata documentation](/concepts/assets/software-defined-assets#recording-materialization-metadata).

> ## Step 2: Enable viewing numeric metadata in Dagster Cloud Insights

Reviewer: ```suggestion
---

## Step 2: Enable viewing numeric metadata in Dagster Cloud Insights
```

> Once one or more assets are emitting numeric metadata values, you are able to enable viewing them in the Insights UI. Note that it may take up to 24 hours for new metadata types to be reflected in the UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once one or more assets are emitting numeric metadata values, you'll be able to enable viewing them in the Insights UI. **Note**: It may take up to 24 hours for new metadata types to be reflected in the UI.
```

> To modify the list of materialization metadata values shown in Insights, click the "Edit" button in the Insights sidebar next to the "User provided metrics" header.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To modify the list of materialization metadata values shown in Insights, click the **Edit** button in the Insights sidebar next to the **User provided metrics** header.
```

UI components like buttons, headings, etc. should be bolded

<Image
alt="Insights sidebar showing the Edit button by the User provided metrics header"
src="/images/dagster-cloud/insights/insights-sidebar.jpeg"
width={2538}
height={1616}
/>

> In the dialog which appears, you can see a list of available metrics to check or uncheck.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the dialog that appears, you can see a list of available metrics to check or uncheck.
```

<Image
alt="Metadata metrics selection dialog with checkboxes"
src="/images/dagster-cloud/insights/insights-dialog.png"
width={1408}
height={674}
/>

> Selected metrics will be immediately available to view in Insights in the sidebar, and on individual asset pages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Selected metrics will be immediately available to view in Insights in the sidebar and on individual asset pages.
```

nit ⛏️  - no comma needed here

<Note>
  This feature is considered <strong>experimental</strong>.
</Note>

Any numeric [asset materialization metadata](/concepts/assets/software-defined-assets#recording-materialization-metadata) attached to your assets can be viewed and aggregated in the Dagster Insights UI. This is a good way to track usage, cost, data size, or other characteristics of your data assets over time, and across different parts of your platform.

---

## Prerequisites

To complete the steps in this guide, you'll need:

- A Dagster Cloud account on the Pro plan

---

## Step 1: Emit numeric values alongside your asset materializations

In order to populate Insights with materialization metadata, you must first emit numeric metadata to be aggregated. In the below example, we attach a `num_rows` metadata value to the output of our `table1` asset. Insights will let us track this value over time, and aggregate it between any other assets which might provide a `num_rows` value.

```python file=/concepts/assets/asset_materialization_metadata_none.py
from dagster import Output, asset

@asset
def table1() -> Output[None]:
    ...  # write out some data to table1

>     return Output(None, metadata={"num_rows": 25})

Reviewer 2: this should probably be `MaterializeResult`
